Conclusion: Debian's Future {#conclusion}
===========================

The story of Falcot Corp ends with this last chapter; but Debian lives
on, and the future will certainly bring many interesting surprises.

Upcoming Developments {#sect.upcoming-developments}
=====================

Weeks (or months) before a new version of Debian is released, the
Release Manager picks the codename for the next version. Now that Debian
version 8 is out, the developers are already busy working on the next
version, codenamed *Stretch*…

There is no official list of planned changes, and Debian never makes
promises relating to technical goals of the coming versions. However, a
few development trends can already be noted, and we can try some bets on
what might happen (or not).

In order to improve security and trust, most if not all the packages
will be made to build reproducibly; that is to say, it will be possible
to rebuild byte-for-byte identical binary packages from the source
packages, thus allowing everyone to verify that no tampering has
happened during the builds.

In a related theme, a lot of effort will have gone into improving
security by default, and mitigating both “traditional” attacks and the
new threats implied by mass surveillance.

Of course, all the main software suites will have had a major release.
The latest version of the various desktops will bring better usability
and new features. Wayland, the new display server that is being
developed to replace X11 with a more modern alternative, will be
available (although maybe not default) for at least some desktop
environments.

A new feature of the archive maintenance software, “bikesheds”, will
allow developers to host special-purpose package repositories in
addition to the main repositories; this will allow for personal package
repositories, repositories for software not ready to go into the main
archive, repositories for software that has only a very small audience,
temporary repositories for testing new ideas, and so on.

Debian's Future {#sect.future-of-debian}
===============

In addition to these internal developments, one can reasonably expect
new Debian-based distributions to come to light, as many tools keep
making this task easier. New specialized subprojects will also be
started, in order to widen Debian's reach to new horizons.

The Debian user community will increase, and new contributors will join
the project… including, maybe, you!

The Debian project is stronger than ever, and well on its way towards
its goal of a universal distribution; the inside joke within the Debian
community is about *World Domination*.

In spite of its old age and its respectable size, Debian keeps on
growing in all kinds of (sometimes unexpected) directions. Contributors
are teeming with ideas, and discussions on development mailing lists,
even when they look like bickerings, keep increasing the momentum.
Debian is sometimes compared to a black hole, of such density that any
new free software project is attracted.

Beyond the apparent satisfaction of most Debian users, a deep trend is
becoming more and more indisputable: people are increasingly realising
that collaborating, rather than working alone in their corner, leads to
better results for everyone. Such is the rationale used by distributions
merging into Debian by way of subprojects.

The Debian project is therefore not threatened by extinction…

Future of this Book {#sect.future-of-this-book}
===================

We would like this book to evolve in the spirit of free software. We
therefore welcome contributions, remarks, suggestions, and criticism.
Please direct them to Raphaël (<hertzog@debian.org>) or Roland
(<lolando@debian.org>). For actionable feedback, feel free to open bug
reports against the `debian-handbook` Debian package. The website will
be used to gather all information relevant to its evolution, and you
will find there information on how to contribute, in particular if you
want to translate this book to make it available to an even larger
public than today. [](http://debian-handbook.info/)

We tried to integrate most of what our experience at Debian taught us,
so that anyone can use this distribution and take the best advantage of
it as soon as possible. We hope this book contributes to making Debian
less confusing and more popular, and we welcome publicity around it!

We would like to conclude on a personal note. Writing (and translating)
this book took a considerable amount of time out of our usual
professional activity. Since we are both freelance consultants, any new
source of income grants us the freedom to spend more time improving
Debian; we hope this book to be successful and to contribute to this. In
the meantime, feel free to retain our services!
[](http://www.freexian.com) [](http://www.gnurandal.com)

See you soon!
