Get the book
============

Before going further, if you want to make up your mind about the book,
you're invited to [browse the online
version](https://debian-handbook.info/browse/en-US/stable/).

Buy the English Paperback
-------------------------

The paperback is available through Lulu's print-on-demand service at a
price of â‚¬44.90 (without VAT and shipping). [Click here to view the book
details on Lulu.com](). Click on the button below to buy it directly.

Download the electronic version
-------------------------------

The e-book is available in 3 formats (PDF, EPUB, Mobipocket) and
multiple languages.

The book is freely available because we want everybody to benefit from
it. That said maintaining it for each new Debian release takes time and
lots of effort, and we appreciate being thanked for this. If you find
this book valuable, please consider contributing to its continued
maintenance either by buying a paperback copy or by making a donation
via the form below (after having completed your donation, you will be
automatically directed to the download page).

Pick your contribution:

You can also directly download the book on [this
page](https://debian-handbook.info/get/now/). In that case, we hope that
you will contribute to the book's success by spreading the word around
you. Of course, you can always come back later to make a donation.

Download the book
-----------------

*Thank you very much for your donation*. We really appreciate it. We
hope that you will enjoy our book!

The book is available in 3 formats and multiple languages (see other
tabs for translations).

The PDF format is the document corresponding to the printed book. It's
not suitable for reading on small screens. The EPUB format is the
recommended format if your reading devices supports it (most smartphones
and many ebook readers do support it). The Mobipocket format is mainly
for ebook readers that do not support EPUB (like the Kindle).

Click on the link of the version that you wish to download:

-   English PDF (30 Mb)

-   English EPUB (5 Mb)

-   English Mobipocket (13 Mb)
